---
title: Frequency converters
---

## Frequency converters general information

A typical frequency converter (FC) nowadays is a so-called voltage-source type -
over 95% of all FC are voltage-source converters (VSC). This FC type has a
DC-link with a capacitor bank across (see Fig.1).

import Image from "next/image";
import basic_fc_2Image from "./images/basic_fc_2.png";

<img src={basic_fc_2Image.src} width="80%" height="80%" /> _Fig.1. VSC
topology._

The voltage of the supply network with a constant frequency and amplitude is
first rectified into DC voltage though with some ripples (Fig.2), and then it is
converted into the voltage with the required frequency and amplitude (Fig. 3).
Note that the voltage waveform is made of pulses of varying duration, wherein
the "fundamental" voltage is sinusoidal.

import rectificationImage from "./images/rectification.png";

<img src={rectificationImage.src} width="80%" height="80%" /> _Fig.2. Rectified
current in the DC link._

import pwm_voltageImage from "./images/pwm_voltage.png";

<img src={pwm_voltageImage.src} width="20%" height="20%" /> _(a)_

import pwm_currentImage from "./images/pwm_current.png";

<img src={pwm_currentImage.src} width="20%" height="20%" /> _(b)_

_Fig.3. Phase voltage (a) and current (b) at the converter output (machine
side)._

Some FC theory can be found for example
[here](http://www.frequencyconverter.net/basics.html),
[here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Variable-frequency_drive) and
[here](http://machinedesign.com/motorsdrives/abcs-and-1-2-3s-variable-frequency-drives).

##### FC mounting variant

Small and light FC are usually wall-mounted, while large and heavy are -
floor-mounted. In Fig.4 the smaller dark-colored FC are for wall-mounting. The
larger light-colored FC should be floor-installed. Usually FC above 250 kW can
be found in floor-mounted versions only. FC can be wall mounted when powers are
below 250 kW. Wall-mounted modules can be convenient in certain cases, e.g. FC
can be installed into existing cubicles or when the floor is wet wall mounted
design can be the only way. For some powers (usually 200...250 kW) there exists
both wall-mounted & floor-mounted versions.

---

## FC topologies

FC can be 2-quadrant (2Q) and 4-quadrant (4Q):

- 2Q FC can transfer power only in one direction - from the grid to the electric
  machine (motor),
- 4Q FC can transfer power not only from the grid to the machine but also from
  the machine (generator) to the grid.

Usually the operational mode (motoring, generating or both) of the application
defines what FC should be chosen, 2Q or 4Q. For example a wind turbine requires
4Q FC with fully-controlled inventor scheme at the grid side. Sometimes
operational requirements in applications which typically require 2Q, may require
4Q - for example large fan with high inertia may require considerable braking
capability to slow down in reasonably short time.

FC can be low-voltage (LV) and medium-voltage (MV). LV FC usually have only
2-level (2L) topology, MV - several alternative topologies (3L-NPC, SCHB, etc.).
Both the LV and MV topologies can be 2Q and 4Q.

The choice of LV or MV is usually defined by the power level, but other features
of the application, e.g. long cable can also affect the choice.

Some FC require input transformer, some don't.

As in _DriveConstructor_ we deal with VSC only, all the topologies included in
the software and presented below have "VSC" in the designations.

### Converters of 2-level topology

##### 2Q-2L-VSC-6p, 2Q-2L-VSC-12p and 4Q-2L-VSC

2Q FC inventor scheme at the grid side can be 6-pulse ("6p") and 12-pulse
("12p"). Difference between "6p" and "12p" is in size, weight, cost, efficiency
and influence on the grid (THD). 4Q FC is larger, heavier, more expensive and
has lower efficiency than 2Q FC. 4Q produce lower THD in the grid. 2-level FC
are usually LV.

import afe_dc2l_dfe_IngImage from "./images/afe_dc2l_dfe_Ing.png";

<img src={afe_dc2l_dfe_IngImage.src} width="60%" height="60%" /> _Fig.4a.
2Q-2L-VSC-6p_.

import afe_dc2l_dfeImage from "./images/afe_dc2l_dfe.png";

<img src={afe_dc2l_dfeImage.src} width="20%" height="20%" /> _Fig.4b. Icon
designation_.

Note that on Fig.4a motor side of the FC is the right side, while on Fig.4b -
left side.

import afe_dc2l_dfe12_IngImage from "./images/afe_dc2l_dfe12_Ing.png";

<img src={afe_dc2l_dfe12_IngImage.src} width="90%" height="90%" /> _Fig.5a.
2Q-2L-VSC-12p_.

import afe_dc2l_dfe12Image from "./images/afe_dc2l_dfe12.png";

<img src={afe_dc2l_dfe12Image.src} width="20%" height="20%" /> _Fig.5b. Icon
designation_.

import afe_dc2l_afe_IngImage from "./images/afe_dc2l_afe_Ing.png";

<img src={afe_dc2l_afe_IngImage.src} width="60%" height="60%" /> _Fig.6a.
4Q-2L-VSC_.

import afe_dc2l_afeImage from "./images/afe_dc2l_afe.png";

<img src={afe_dc2l_afeImage.src} width="20%" height="20%" /> _Fig.6b. Icon
designation_.

### Converters with 3- and multi-level topologies

##### 2Q-3L-NPC-VSC and 4Q-3L-NPC-VSC

3-level FC are usually MV. NPC stands for Neutral-Point Clamped.

import afe_dc3l_dfe12_IngImage from "./images/afe_dc3l_dfe12_Ing.png";

<img src={afe_dc3l_dfe12_IngImage.src} width="90%" height="90%" /> _Fig.7a.
2Q-3L-NPC-VSC_.

import afe_dc3l_afe12Image from "./images/afe_dc3l_afe12.png";

<img src={afe_dc3l_afe12Image.src} width="20%" height="20%" /> _Fig.7b. Icon
designation_.

import afe_dc3l_afe_IngImage from "./images/afe_dc3l_afe_Ing.png";

<img src={afe_dc3l_afe_IngImage.src} width="70%" height="70%" /> _Fig.8a.
4Q-3L-NPC-VSC_.

import afe_dc3l_afeImage from "./images/afe_dc3l_afe.png";

<img src={afe_dc3l_afeImage.src} width="20%" height="20%" /> _Fig.8b. Icon
designation_.

##### 2Q-ML-SCHB-VSC and 4Q-ML-SCHB-VSC

SCHB stands for Series-Connected H-Bridge.

import SCHB_2Image from "./images/SCHB_2.png";

<img src={SCHB_2Image.src} width="50%" height="50%" /> _Fig.9a. 2Q-ML-SCHB-VSC
topology_.

import SCHB_dfe_cellImage from "./images/SCHB_dfe_cell.png";

<img src={SCHB_dfe_cellImage.src} width="40%" height="40%" /> _Fig.9b.
2Q-ML-SCHB-VSC cell_.

import sc_hb_simple2Image from "./images/sc_hb_simple2.png";

<img src={sc_hb_simple2Image.src} width="20%" height="20%" /> _Fig.9c. Icon
designation_.

import SCHB_afe_cellImage from "./images/SCHB_afe_cell.png";

<img src={SCHB_afe_cellImage.src} width="40%" height="40%" /> _Fig.9d.
4Q-ML-SCHB-VSC cell_.

import sc_hb_simple3Image from "./images/sc_hb_simple3.png";

<img src={sc_hb_simple3Image.src} width="20%" height="20%" /> _Fig.9e. Icon
designation_.

---

## FC power, voltage and current

### Rated power

FC are rated according to
[IEC standard](http://www.openelectrical.org/wiki/index.php?title=Standard_IEC_Ratings).
The series of powers in _DriveConstructor_ is 1.1, 1.5, 2.2, 3, 4, 5.5, 7.5, 11,
15, 18.5, 22, 30, 37, 45, 55, 75, 90, 110, 132, 160, 200, 250, 280, 315, 355,
400, 450, 500, 560, 630, 710, 800, 900, 1000, 1250, 1400, 1600, 2000, 2500,
3150, 4000 kW. If it is desirable that power is chosen automatically then choose
"any" - it is the default setting.

### Rated voltage

The same voltage ranges are given both for grid side and machine side of the
converter. In _DriveConstructor_ the variants to choose from are: 380-440,
650-700, 3200-3400, 5900-6700, 9000-12000 V. If it is desirable that voltage is
chosen automatically then choose "any" - it is the default setting.

In _DriveConstructor_ 3L-NPC topologies can have voltage rating of 2460 V, 3300
V and 4160 V, while ML-SCHB topologies - 6000 V, 6600 V, 10000 V and 11000 V.

### Currents

For almost any application it can be expected that load torque will vary with
time going up and down. The pattern can be quite unpredictable. As current drawn
from the FC is proportional to the load torque, the torque variation determines
the current variation. In some application, e.g. pumps, the variation is not
significant and can be called "low", while in other applications, e.g. conveyor
or winch, the variation can be significant, and, therefore can be called "high".
Examples of what can be called "high overloads" and "low overloads" are
presented in Fig.1.

import fc_lo_hoImage from "./images/fc_lo_ho.png";

<img src={fc_lo_hoImage.src} width="60%" height="60%" /> _Fig.1. "High
overloads" and "low overloads"_.

Choosing the FC the designer should take this aspect into account. Each FC has
certain overload capability determined by several physical limitations such as
thermal current and maximum current. The overloads the FC can tolerate will be
characterized by a certain amplitude, duration and cycle.

The same converter can be used for "high overloads (HO)" and "low overloads
(LO)" but its rated current in a catalogue will be presented in two variants;
$$I_H$$ and $$I_L$$, where $$I_L$$ is always higher than $$I_H$$. The principle
is that motor current $$I_m$$ should be lower than FC current. When choosing FC
for LO application, e.g. a pump, $$I_L$$ should be used and $$I_L$$ should be
higher than $$I_m$$. Usually for LO applications acceptable overloads are just
10% and FC current should then handle $$1.1*I_L$$. When choosing FC for HO
application, e.g. a conveyor, $$I_H$$ should be used and $$I_H$$ should be
higher than $$I_m$$. Usually for HO applications acceptable overloads are 50%
and FC current should then handle $$1.5*I_H$$.

Explanation is presented in Fig.10. Note $$I_c$$ which is rated continuous
current, which is not used in practice. Short-term (10 s) high current of up to
200% of $$I_H$$ is acceptable for any converter.

import fc_overloadsImage from "./images/fc_overloads.png";

<img src={fc_overloadsImage.src} width="70%" height="70%" />
_Fig.10. Current overloads of conventional FC_.

---

## FC cooling

Typical efficiency of the low-voltage FC is 98% meaning 2% of converted energy
is turned into heat which needs to be removed from the enclosed area. FC can be
cooled by moving air and water (air- and liquid-cooling; _AC_ and _LC_). The
difference between _AC_ and _LC_-cooled FC is in size and weight - higher
compactness and lower weight can be achieved by use of liquid (water) cooling.
_AC_ and _LC_(=_WC_) FCs are usually priced on the same level.

Fig.1 depicts a 250 kW low-voltage FC mounted on the wall in an enclosed area
such as an electrical room.

import fccoolingairnatImage from "./images/fc_cooling_air_nat.png";

<img src={fccoolingairnatImage.src} width="40%" height="40%" /> _(a)_

import fc_cooling_air_ACImage from "./images/fc_cooling_air_AC.png";

<img src={fc_cooling_air_ACImage.src} width="40%" height="40%" /> _(b)_

import fc_cooling_air_WCImage from "./images/fc_cooling_air_WC.png";

<img src={fc_cooling_air_WCImage.src} width="40%" height="40%" /> _(c)_

_Fig.11. Cooling types._

With the efficiency of 98% the 250 kW FC will produce 5 kW of heat. To remove
the heat from the FC's heatsink a quite powerful ventilation fan should be
integrated into the FC enclosure. For the 250 kW power the volume of air pumped
through the heatsink should be in the order of 2000-3000 m3/h. Filtering may be
required if the environment is dusty or dirty. This can be a maintenance
concern.

If the produced heat is not handled (removed) in some way, eventually the
temperature within the enclosed area (ambient temperature for the FC) will
increase. Increasing the ambient operating temperature above the maximum design
temperature of the FC will cause the FC to overheat which shortens its lifetime
and will cause shutdowns. In Fig.1,a the heat is removed in a natural way, e.g.
through walls, windows, doors. This is possible if the enclosed area is large
(e.g. large production hall). In Fig.1,b the heat is removed with the help of
air conditioning. The latter measure can be costly and/or complicated to
implement.

Fig. 1,c depicts water-cooled FC with water pipes going to the neighboring room.
First, the water-cooled FC is considerably smaller (half the weight of the
air-cooled one). Secondly, the heat produced inside the FC due to losses is
divided into two parts; 90% is removed from the heat sink by the cooling water
and brought away from the enclosed area where the FC is installed, 10% are
dissipated within the enclosed area. The 10% of 5 kW of heat make just 500 W,
which can be easily dissipated without additional measures like air
conditioning. So, the largest portion of heat is removed through the liquid and
can be transferred to another media through a heat exchanger as shown in
Fig.1,c.

Liquids used in the FC primary cooling loop. Typical: drinking water,
demineralized or deionized water, and a water/glycol mixture for freeze
protection.

##### Heat exchangers

If clean cooling water is not available on site, water-to-air or water-to-water
heat exchanger may be used, providing clean water. Parameters of the heat
exchanger such as size, weight, cost and losses need to be included in the
system parameters/ performances when benchmarking alternative systems (cooling
solutions). Liquid to liquid (water-to-water) heat exchangers are used when a
cooling liquid is readily available. Liquid to air (water-to-air) heat
exchangers are used primarily when air conditioning is not desired, or in
dusty/dirty environments where air cooled VFD's can be adversely affected by
these conditions (plugged heat sinks, electronics covered in dust, complicated
maintenance routines. Challenges of water cooling: condensation, electrochemical
corrosion (mostly related to HEx)

Other factors to consider:

- Relation between cooling and IP
- Audible noise. The large fan is the primary reason air cooled FCs are noisy.
  There is no large air fan in LC FC, just a very small fans to cool the
  electronic boards

[Recommended description by Siemens](http://w3.siemens.com/mcms/mc-solutions/en/converters/low-voltage-converters/sinamics-s/motion-control-drives/tabcardpages-system-architecture/pages/cooling.aspx)

---

## Filters

In many cases FC should be equipped with either input or output filters. Filters
can help to solve various EMC issues on both grid side and machine side.
However, the pay is extra size, weight, cost and losses. Some MV topologies do
not require output filters. In DC it is possible to choose "choke" and
"choke+RFI" for input filter and du/dt filter and sin-filter for output filter.

### Output filters

##### SIN-filter

The LC filter, called the "sinus filter", "sine-filter" or "sin filter" (Fig. 1)
is the most efficient filter in terms of turning the current and voltage
waveforms that the FC produces into almost sinusoidal form. Fig. 2 shows an
example of the effect of a sin-filter on the shape of the voltage waveform at
the FC output. With the use of a sin-filter, virtually all the negative effects
described in chapter
[FC influence on the electric machine](Systems/fc_influence_em.md)> are
eliminated, since the machine is powered by voltage and current with a shape
very close to sinusoidal.

import sin_filter_topologyImage from "./images/sin_filter_topology.png";

<img src={sin_filter_topologyImage.src} width="40%" height="40%" /> _(a)_

import sin_filterImage from "./images/sin_filter.png";

<img src={sin_filterImage.src} width="30%" height="30%" /> _(b)_

_Fig. 12. "Classical" sin-filter topology (a) and product example (b)_.

import pwm_measuredImage from "./images/pwm_measured.png";

<img src={pwm_measuredImage.src} width="40%" height="40%" /> _(a)_

import after_sinImage from "./images/after_sin.png";

<img src={after_sinImage.src} width="40%" height="40%" /> _(b)_

_Fig. 13. The voltage waveforms at the input (a) and at the output (b) of the
sin-filter. Note different time span on the oscillograms_.

Sin-filters have certain drawbacks (largely due to the high inductance value of
its chokes):

- The voltage drop in the filter is 3-10%, depending on the manufacturer, the
  nominal power (current) of the filter and the frequency of the PWM.
- Losses of 0.5-2%. The more power, the lower the relative losses in the filter.
- Displacement of the field weakening point by 1-2 Hz towards low frequencies.
- Significant reduction (up to 20% or more) of the critical moment (overload
  capacity) of the machine.

Also it should be noted that the sine-filter is quite an expensive device. Its
cost can be up to 30-40% of the cost of the FC (at low power - up to 50-70%).

##### du/dt-filter

Structurally, the du/dt filter is a three-phase choke (Fig. 14,a), and from the
point of view of the electric circuit theory it is a concentrated inductive
resistance. The inclusion of inductance in the equivalent electrical circuit of
the cable increases the wave resistance of the cable line and brings down the
reflection coefficient. Thus, the voltage peaks at terminals decreases.

import dut_filter_topologyImage from "./images/dut_filter_topology.png";

<img src={dut_filter_topologyImage.src} width="40%" height="40%" /> _(a)_

import dut_filterImage from "./images/dut_filter.png";

<img src={dut_filterImage.src} width="30%" height="30%" /> _(b)_

_Fig. 14. "Classical" du/dt-filter topology (a) and product example (b)_.

However, the main purpose of du/dt-filters is to eliminate du/dt-effect, i.e.
decrease in the rise time of the voltage pulse. In addition, due to the inertial
properties of the inductance, the filter also reduces the voltage surge at the
leading edge of the pulse (Fig.15). The length of the cable is 30 m. Note
different rise time: dt=220 ns, dt=820 ns.

import before_dutImage from "./images/before_dut.png";

<img src={before_dutImage.src} width="30%" height="30%" /> _(a)_

import after_dutImage from "./images/after_dut.png";

<img src={after_dutImage.src} width="30%" height="30%" /> _(b)_

_Fig. 15. Voltage pulses at the machine terminals without du/dt-filter (a) and
with a filter (b)_.

##### Common recommendations on the use of du/dt-filters and other measures

To reduce the overvoltages, du/dt-effect and bearing currents, a whole complex
of measures is often applied, including both recommendations to machine
manufacturers, and the use of various filters, special cables, etc. The measures
depend in particular on the voltage level of the mains and on the power (size)
of the machine. Different drive manufacturers can offer different measures. One
example is presented in the table:

|                  | < 100 kW                                                   | >= 100 kW                                                                         | >= 350 kW                                                                                                                               |
| ---------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| $$U_r\leq500 V$$ | Standard machine                                           | Standard machine + isolated N-bearing                                             | Standard machine + isolated N-bearing + ferrite rings                                                                                   |
| $$U_r\leq600 V$$ | (Standard machine + du/dt-filter) or Reinforced insulation | (Standard machine + du/dt-filter) or (Reinforced insulation + isolated N-bearing) | (Standard machine + isolated N-bearing + du/dt-filter + 1 ferrite ring) or (Reinforced insulation + isolated N-bearing + ferrite rings) |
| $$U_r\leq690 V$$ | Reinforced insulation + du/dt-filter                       | Reinforced insulation + du/dt-filter                                              | Reinforced insulation + isolated N-bearing + du/dt-filter + 1 ferrite ring                                                              |

### Grid filters

##### Chokes

Influence of presence of the choke and its size on the harmonics injected into
the grid is presented in Fig.16 and 17. The graphs show current waveform and the
value of current distortion THD(i) as % of nominal current at full load.

import a6p_no_chokeImage from "./images/6p_no_choke.png";

<img src={a6p_no_chokeImage.src} width="70%" height="70%" /> _(a)_

import THDi80Image from "./images/THDi80.png";

<img src={THDi80Image.src} width="25%" height="25%" /> _(b)_

_Fig. 16. 6-pulse rectifier without any choke (a) and current waveform for this
topology (b)_.

import a6p_with_chokeImage from "./images/6p_with_choke.png";

<img src={a6p_with_chokeImage.src} width="70%" height="70%" /> _(a)_

import THDi40Image from "./images/THDi40.png";

<img src={THDi40Image.src} width="23%" height="23%" /> _(b)_

import THDi28Image from "./images/THDi28.png";

<img src={THDi28Image.src} width="25%" height="25%" /> _(c)_

_Fig. 17. 6-pulse rectifier with a choke (a) and current waveforms for small
choke (b) and big choke (c)_.

##### LCL filter

FC with LCL filter between FC and the grid is presented in Fig.7,a. Current
waveform is very close to sinusoidal as can be seen in Fig. 7,b.

import fc_with_LCLImage from "./images/fc_with_LCL.png";

<img src={fc_with_LCLImage.src} width="85%" height="85%" /> _(a)_

import THDi5Image from "./images/THDi5.png";

<img src={THDi5Image.src} width="25%" height="25%" /> _(b)_

_Fig. 18. Topology (a) and current waveform (b)_.

##### EMC filters

EMC filters (Fig.19) is destined for emission reduction in MHz range. Example of
the effect is presented in Fig.20.

import emc_filter_topologyImage from "./images/emc_filter_topology.png";

<img src={emc_filter_topologyImage.src} width="25%" height="25%" /> _(a)_

import emc_filter_acImage from "./images/emc_filter_ac.png";

<img src={emc_filter_acImage.src} width="25%" height="25%" /> _(b)_

_Fig. 19. EMC filters: topology (a), AC side filter product example (b)_.

import EMC_with_without_filterImage from "./images/EMC_with_without_filter.png";

<img src={EMC_with_without_filterImage.src} width="75%" height="75%" />

_Fig. 20. Effect of use of EMC-filter_.
