---
title: What is an optimal system
---

The system can be called _optimal_ if it was benchmarked with alternative
systems on one or several criteria and showed the best score on the criteria.
The criteria can be cost (e.g. Capital Expenditures, CAPEX or Operational
Expenditures, OPEX), efficiency (e.g. at rated load or at partial loads), size
and weight, reliability, etc. The criteria should be relevant for the
application. For example, for a pump cost will be one of the most important
criteria, while weight will usually be much less important. For wind turbines
both efficiency and weight will be important, leaving cost less important.

In the proposed _Exercises_ the systems should be usually designed for one
criterion. In Fig. 1 the list of criteria to choose from contains Cost,
Efficiency and Life Cycle Cost (LCC).

![The task](./images/optimization_setting.png) _Fig. 1. The task_.

The process of selection of the variables (system structure and components with
concrete specification) to reach the best score on the chosen criterion can be
called _system optimization_.

### Benchmarking

As mentioned above, optimal system is selected in competition with alternative
solutions, therefore, some benchmarking (comparison) method in needed. The
benchmarking can be quantitative and qualitative, the latter being preferable.

##### Quantitative and qualitative comparisons

For example, motor technologies can be compared looking into loss mechanisms,
etc (Fig.2). However, numbers reflecting the components and system behavior in
different operational aspects will provide a more credible answer. One of such
measures is off course efficiency (including partial loads!). An example is
shown in Fig.3.

![Qualitative comparison of motor technology](./images/qualitative_comparison_1.png)

_Fig. 2. Qualitative comparison of motor technology_.

![Comparing efficiencies](./images/comparing_eff_curves.png) _Fig. 3. Comparing
efficiencies_.

It is relatively easy to draw conclusions on which system is best (optimal) for
the application when there is only one criterion, e.g. cost. It is more
challenging to benchmark on several criteria. In such case Spider Diagram can be
the right tool to visualize the results (Fig.4).

![Quantitative comparison](./images/benchmarking.png) _Fig. 4. Quantitative
comparison_.

### Life Cycle Cost (LCC)

LCC is one of the popular criteria for benchmarking. Goodness of the EM for an
application can be defined by cost of ownership which comprises purchase cost,
cost of running (COR) and cost of not running (CONR). COR is cost of consumed
energy which is defined by efficiency. CONR is defined by MTBF (reliability)
which gives prediction of how often the machine will fail. CONR would include
cost of repair and cost of stopped production. CONR is not included in
_DriveConstructor_.

![Cost of ownership](./images/cost_of_ownership.png) _Fig. 5. Cost of
ownership_.
