---
title: Variable speed in applications
description: Variable speed in applications description
---

A motor controlled by a frequency converter (FC) has become a commodity. This is
due to the number of advantages that provide the regulation of the motor speed
and, accordingly, the driven mechanism's speed. The range of applications for
variable speed drives (VSD) is very broad: general industry and utilities,
defense and aerospace, transport and power generation, household appliances,
etc. One of the possible classifications of the applications is presented in
Fig. 1.

import Image from "next/image";
import drives_applications_newImage from "./images/drives_applications_new.png";

<img src={drives_applications_newImage.src} width="100%" height="100%" />

_Fig. 1. Classification of the applications where VSD are used_.

In many cases electric drive systems are designed for variable-speed operation.
For example, the drive of a paper machine where high-precision synchronization
and speed control of the multiple motors is required to produce paper of a
specified quality, or a "flying shears" drive in metallurgy used to cut the
moving sheet of metal. Also, in many cases, frequency converters are installed
on existing standard induction motors.

Usually, one or more of the following goals are pursued:

##### Energy saving

In many processes, significant energy savings can be achieved if at each instant
of time the speed is optimized for the given operating point. For example, a fan
operating at 50% of the nominal speed consumes less than 15% of its rated power.

##### Process control, optimization, monitoring

Modern frequency converters have a wide range of functions that, along with
speed control of the electric motor, also allow the transfer to the top-level
automation system of all necessary information on the motor operation, remote
control and monitoring. This allows full control of the operation of the
regulated unit and, as a result, optimization of the production process as a
whole. The result can be improved quality, increased output, reduced equipment
downtime, etc.

##### Extended equipment lifetime

Smooth start-up and shutdown of the unit, provided by the FC, significantly
extends the service life of the electric motor and the driven mechanism and
increases the time between overhauls, thanks to the absence of current spikes
and mechanical shocks and jerks. In addition, the drive provides a set of motor
protections, such as protection against overheating, jamming, long overloads,
etc.

##### Ease of servicing the whole set of equipment

The frequency converter does not require much of maintenance. At the same time,
the installation of the FC allows in many cases to simplify the operation of
many components of the system. For example, in water supply systems, smooth
start-ups and shutdowns of pumping units, flow control with maintaining constant
pressure, allows to eliminate hydraulic shocks, as well as reduce pressure in
the pipeline. Due to this, the accident rate in the main line (pipe breaks,
etc.) is significantly reduced.

##### Improvement of working conditions for the personnel

In many cases, when introducing frequency converters on fans, conveyors and a
number of other mechanisms, it is possible to achieve noise reduction.
