---
title: Power cables
---

import Image from "next/image";
import cable1Image from "./images/power-cable.png";

<img src={cable1Image.src} width="40%" height="40%" /> _Fig.1. Medium voltage
cable._

### Cable parameters

#### Voltage

In _DriveConstructor_ voltage rating of a cable is being chosen automatically
according to the voltage at the electric machine terminals.

#### Length

We limit the possible cable length to 5 km, so the range to choose from is 0 to
5000 m

#### Cable cross-section

Cables are produced with standard cross-sections of their phase conductors. We
can choose from the row: 0.5, 0.75, 1, 1.5, 2.5, 4, 6, 10, 16, 25, 35, 50, 70,
95, 120, 150, 185, 240, 300, 400, 500, 630, 800 and 1000 $$mm^2$$.

#### Conductor material

In _DriveConstructor_, as well as in the real life, the choice should be made
between copper and aluminum cable. Some arguments are presented below.

###### Considering weight and size

For the same conductivity the weight of an aluminum cable will be only 54% of
the weight of a copper cable, but the cross-section of the aluminum cable will
be higher than that of the copper cable by 56%. So the choice will be a greater
cable cross-section or a higher cable weight. Copper cable is thinner but
heavier.

###### Considering cost

Generally speaking, aluminum cable will be cheaper. However, copper cable is
more ductile and less susceptible to electrical contact problems. Due to its
smaller cross-section, the copper cable will also be easier to install as the
stiffness of the cable depends on the square of the cross-sectional area and
thus on the fourth power of the diameter. So one should take into account the
extra cost and effort involved in installing the less pliable aluminum cables.

#### Number of runs

The surface of the cable increases not proportionally (actually slower) with
increase of the cable's cross-section, therefore, for a thicker cable heat
dissipation is less intensive and the current density should be decreased
compared to thinner ones. So, in some cases it may be more economical to have
two or more parallel thin cables (two or more "runs") with higher current
densities than one big cable with lower current density. In _DriveConstructor_
it is possible to choose number of runs from the following options: "auto", 1,
2, 4. When "auto" is chosen, _DriveConstructor_ will calculate optimal number of
runs automatically.
